AEM Environment Setup — Presentation Guide


1. Introduction

Now that we understand what AEM is, how Cloud Manager works, and the code quality standards, it's time to set up a local development environment.

The goal here is to be able to develop, build, and test AEM code on your own machine before sending anything to the cloud.

This is one of the most practical lessons in the certification.


2. The Three Components

A local AEM environment has three logical parts:

- The AEM Project: your custom code, configuration, and content
- The Local AEM Runtime: a local version of the Author and Publish services
- The Local Dispatcher Runtime: a local version of Apache HTTP Server with the Dispatcher module

Think of it as a miniature version of what runs in the cloud, all on your laptop.

The goal is to validate everything locally before it goes through Cloud Manager.


3. Development Tools

To work with AEM locally, you need four core tools:

- Java JDK 21 — AEM is a Java application, Java 21 is the recommended version
- Node.js — required for front-end tooling and the Adobe I/O CLI
- Apache Maven — the build tool for all AEM projects
- Git — source control

After installing each one, always verify with a version command.

For Java: java -version
For Maven: mvn -v
For Node: node --version


4. Adobe I/O CLI

The Adobe I/O CLI, known as aio, is a command-line tool that lets you interact with Adobe services.

You install it as a global npm package:
npm install -g @adobe/aio-cli

Once installed, you add plugins for the services you need:
- Cloud Manager plugin
- AEM Rapid Development Environment plugin
- Asset Compute plugin

Important: the old JWT authentication was removed in January 2025.
The only supported method now is OAuth Server-to-Server, configured through the Adobe Developer Console.


5. File System Organization

Adobe recommends a specific folder structure for local development:

~/aem-sdk/
  author/    → local Author service
  publish/   → local Publish service
  dispatcher/ → local Dispatcher Tools

~/code/<project-name>/  → your AEM Maven project

This keeps everything organized and makes it easy to manage multiple SDK versions.

On Windows, the tilde (~) maps to %HOMEPATH%.


6. The QuickStart Jar

The AEMaaCS SDK includes a QuickStart Jar, which is a self-contained JAR file that runs a full AEM instance locally.

You download it from Adobe Software Distribution, and you can use it to run either Author or Publish.

Two important rules:
- Never double-click the JAR file — it must be started from the command line
- Always start it with: java -jar aem-author-p4502.jar

Author runs on port 4502.
Publish runs on port 4503.


7. QuickStart Jar Naming Convention

The filename of the JAR controls how AEM starts up.

The format is:
aem-<tier>_<environment>-p<port>.jar

Examples:
- aem-author-p4502.jar → Author in Dev mode on port 4502
- aem-publish-p4503.jar → Publish in Dev mode on port 4503
- aem-author_prod-p4502.jar → Author in Production mode

The tier — author or publish — is locked on first startup.
If you need to change it, you must delete the crx-quickstart folder and start fresh.

The environment mode is useful for testing environment-specific OSGi configurations.


8. Simulating Content Distribution

In production, content moves from Author to Publish through the Adobe Pipeline, which is a cloud-only microservice.

Locally, you simulate this using legacy Replication Agents.

You enable it from the Author service:
- Go to /etc/replication/agents.author.html
- Open the Default Agent
- Enable it and point the transport URI to localhost:4503

After this, anything you publish on Author will replicate to your local Publish instance.


9. Local Dispatcher

The Dispatcher Tools are Docker-based.
They run an Apache HTTP Server with the Dispatcher module inside a container.

You start it with a single script:
./bin/docker_run_hot_reload.sh ./src localhost:4503 8080

This connects the Dispatcher to your local Publish service and exposes it on port 8080.

The hot-reload variant is preferred because it reloads configuration automatically when files change.

There is also a validator tool:
./bin/validate ./src

This checks your Apache and Dispatcher configuration for errors before you deploy.


10. Maven Project Structure

This is where things get important for the exam.

AEM enforces a clear separation between code and content.

The repository has two types of areas:

Immutable — cannot be changed at runtime:
- /apps → your custom components, scripts, clientlibs
- /libs → AEM platform code, never touch this

Mutable — can be changed at runtime:
- /content, /conf, /var, /etc

Each type of content belongs in a specific Maven module.


11. Maven Modules and Package Types

A standard AEM project has these key modules:

- core → Java OSGi bundle (services, models, servlets)
- ui.apps → code package, deploys to /apps
- ui.content → content package, deploys to /content and /conf
- ui.config → OSGi configurations and Repo Init scripts
- all → the container package, the only artifact deployed by Cloud Manager

Package types:
- application → for code packages like ui.apps
- content → for content packages like ui.content
- container → for the all package

The all package embeds all other modules and is the single deployment artifact.
All other packages must set cloudManagerTarget to none so Cloud Manager ignores them.


12. Repo Init and the AEM Archetype

Repo Init is a mechanism that defines JCR structures as part of the application.

You use it to create:
- Folder structures
- Service users
- Groups
- ACL permissions

These scripts run early in the deployment lifecycle, before any application code.
They live in ui.config and are scoped by run mode.

To start a new project, you use the AEM Project Archetype.
The current version is 56.

It generates the full project structure with best practices already in place:
all, core, ui.apps, ui.content, ui.config, ui.frontend, tests, and dispatcher configuration.


13. Troubleshooting

When something is not working, follow this sequence:

1. Check Package Manager — was the package actually installed?
   http://localhost:4502/crx/packmgr

2. Check CRXDE Lite — is the file there and is the content correct?
   http://localhost:4502/crx/de

3. Check the Bundle Console — is the OSGi bundle Active?
   http://localhost:4502/system/console/bundles

4. Read the error.log — AEM logs everything there
   Location: crx-quickstart/logs/error.log

5. For front-end issues — use the clientlib debug tools
   /libs/granite/ui/content/dumplibs.html

The most common errors are wrong Java version and trying to double-click the QuickStart Jar.


14. Closing

Setting up a local AEM environment is not just a setup task — it is the foundation for everything that follows.

You now have:
- The tools to build AEM projects
- A local runtime to test your code
- An understanding of how Maven packages are structured
- A troubleshooting process when things go wrong

The key concepts to remember for the exam:
- QuickStart Jar naming convention and startup rules
- Mutable vs immutable repository areas
- The role of each Maven module
- The all package as the single Cloud Manager deployment artifact
